Thomas F. Urban of Senator Ralph W. Yarborough on
April 22, 1985. In 1964,
President Lyndon Johnson stated, quote, I don't
think Texas has had a senator that voted for the
people more than Senator Yarborough has voted for
them. And no member of the U.S. Senate has stood up
and fought for me or fought for the people more
since I became president than Ralph Yarborough.
What was your relationship with President
Johnson, and how did it change over the years as he
was first senior senator from Texas and later vice
president and president? Well, when I first went
to the Senate, of course, Johnson had opposed my
election. He had opposed it from the governor and
then all the way through. His was the big money of
Texas, and I represented the people. Now, Johnson
was a very, very clever politician. He would vote
for the people on a number of issues, but enough to
say he was progressive, but not to alienate that
vast big money that was supporting him. And some
average senator, like the two we've got now, one Bo
Weaver and one Republican, they just voted
against the people the majority of the time, the
whole time. Johnson didn't. If it was a matter
affecting union labor, he generally voted with
the big contracts. If it was a matter that affected
the poor, he would vote with Sam Rayburn for Social
Security and things like that. So, he didn't want
to see anybody else coming along with the record
that I had of voting for people all the time.
Because he told friends he wanted to be president,
and all of Newark around Washington told him that
he voted the way he voted against the blacks. He
could never be president. He told them that... He
had to get elected. He couldn't be president if he
wasn't elected first, and then the Senate. He had
to vote that way in Texas. They'd have to
understand if you didn't vote that way, you
couldn't be elected. Well, when I voted on, when I
was elected with no money, you might say, on the
platform of fairness and equal treatment to
everybody, Johnson immediately switched and
began to support civil rights bills, and all of
them had been introduced. That was a big switch in
his... He didn't switch his... his position. He
had opposed me in those races, so when he ran for the
Presidency in 1960, I supported John F. Kennedy.
Johnston was very mad about that. I wasn't
particularly sore with him. I felt better about my
relationship with him. I repaid him. I showed him
he couldn't bluff me. I wasn't afraid of him, so I
just wanted to let him know I was his that I was his
equal in independence of thought. Couldn't push
me around. He thought that being vice president,
later president, people from Texas ought to take
orders from him. Thought I would take orders from
him. I supported my own bills, whether he was for or
against them. But our relationship was not a
bitter relationship that's been painted up in the
press a lot. He appointed my son member of the
Indian Claims Commission, where he served 11
years, and I very much appreciate that. I have at
least 30 autographed photographs of Lyndon
Johnson and me over the years. I was down at the
White House a lot. He told me one time, he said,
Ralph, you never give me any property. Come down
here and talk. And you don't go down back and make a
statement about it. I never did make a statement
about it, as it does the White House. I knew he had
the power the next day to say, well, that isn't so.
That's not what I said. And I wasn't going to give
him that chance. But what he had me down there for
was a judiciary appointment of judges in Texas. It
was my patronage that he was trying to trade me out
of. Johnson was a real horse trader, the best I've
ever seen. He was cunning as a fox and a coyote
combined. He was a real 100% politician. That's
what made him effective in legislation. To him,
the politics of it was all up to what he could do and
how the people would respond.
How did your role as a major carrier of legislation
change between administrations of Presidents
Kennedy and then later President Johnson?
There's a constant evolution in that role. When I
first got there with Johnson, the majority leader
of the Senate, it was very difficult to get
anything passed. I got very little passed as long
as he was the majority leader of the Senate because
he was blocking all of it. He had put the chairman in
their positions. I was a co-author of a good many
important bills. I had a role in it because if I
introduced the bill by myself or put my name first
on it, I'd get a lot of other people to put their
names and then put mine where really in the
background I was pushing it harder than anybody.
And I got legislation passed that way but I didn't
issue any statement to the press as my legislation
because I didn't want to get snarled in the House.
Now Lyndon could not block all legislation in the
Senate. even if he didn't want it. I mean, even
while he was majority leader directly, but he
could indirectly due to his great influence with
Sam Rayburn. Sam Rayburn had the house right in the
palm of his hands. He was a terrific speaker,
dynamic in his organizational skills, and very
modest about it all the time. Didn't claim that
power, but he had it, and he was such a believer in
Lyndon Johnson. If Lyndon came over and told him a
senator hadn't treated him fairly, he'd bottle
that senator's bills up and never let any pass. So
you had to think of Sam Rayburn. And so I'm
co-author of a number of beneficial bills during
the years that Lyndon was majority leader, but
that my name first, my bills, no, I couldn't get
them back up. One passed, the Cold War GI Bill.
Lyndon and John F. Kennedy both helped me on that.
Taylor Strong, Eisenhower's president, He was
opposed to the Cold War GI Bill, and they were each
running for the presidency, and they got right in
behind him. Well, we passed it in the Senate, and
Eisenhower was able to block it in the House. Tiger
Teeth blocked it for him because the president
asked him to in the House. And when Kennedy came in
as the president, I went down to see him about it.
He'd been on that committee and helped us pass it
that time. I was telling you about it when we passed
it in 57, I believe, to 31 over the Republicans in
Eisenhower's opposition. Kennedy's answer
says, yes, Ralph, but I'm president now. And then
when Johnson became president, I went back again
to try to pass it. I passed it two or three times. It
took eight years to get it finally written into
law. And Lyndon must have been reading John F.
Kennedy's tapes. He always had those tapes.
Because he looked at me and smiled and said, yes,
Ralph, but I'm president now. When I told him he'd
help me pass it. That's what took me eight years.
The hardest, longest fight I had was to pass that.
Cold War GI Bill, but I've got the tremendous
satisfaction, it is to me tremendous, of seeing
that eight million veterans at least have gotten
an education on that bill. In what ways did your
views on civil rights legislation vary from
President Johnson's? Practically none. Okay.
Practically none, we're both supportive. I don't
think Johnson had before I got there. But when I got
there, he turned around 180 degrees. He became
stronger than he was before. The difference
between us was he was in the leadership role, and I
had very little seniority. I wasn't on the
Judiciary Committee. I wasn't on the committee to
handle the bills. So my role was merely a
supportive role to support him. But where I was
having the most influence in was on the committees
i was on i was on the educational subcommittee went
on it in january of 1958 stayed there 13 years and
was author a co-author of every major educational
bill in that time and i was having there because
that committee was split one time another dirksen
strom thurman and uh goldwater all of them in there
to fight us on another bill and i was only fighting
for those education built because I taught school
three years in the rural schools of Henderson
County. I taught briefly in the University of
Texas Law School. I served four years as the
counsel for the Texas State Teachers
Association, one there. I had been on the Texas
State Board of Law Examiners four years. I
represented a bunch of school districts and
colleges in their litigation. And during the big
years that I served education, while I was
assistant attorney general under Jimmy Allred,
where this plaque the land office gave me in
January 31st of this year, they have since audited
what happened to the judgments I won in the oil
lands of Texas. I had the land desk at four years
under Allred. And the opinions I wrote that are
still being followed in the land office, and
they've given me this plaque that says that I
enriched the permanent school fund by more than
two-tenths of a billion dollars. And the whole
size of it is four-tenths of a billion. Now that's
half of it. That was the greatest educational
contribution I've made in my life. And it's
because I started off as a rural school teacher
when I was 17. and the one teacher of rural school.
My youngest pupil was six and my oldest was 25 and we
had a ball. In 1969, you became chairman of the
powerful Labor and Public Welfare Committee,
which President Johnson stated was responsible
for 80% of the legislation passed by the 89th
Congress. What made this committee so prolific in
the passage of legislation? Because of its
jurisdictional setup. Each committee has
jurisdiction over certain things, armed
services, military bills, interior and insular
affairs. over islands and over national parks and
over Indian reservations and so forth, commerce
over railroads and the Federal Railway Act and
aviation and civil air. By jurisdiction, we had,
Labor and Public Welfare Committee had
jurisdiction over labor legislation, over all
educational legislation, all health
legislation.
All veterans' education and hospitalization,
not the pensions, that went over under taxation.
But all hospital, veterans' hospital, all
veterans' education, we had. My GI Bill was there.
I could pass a proposal on that committee. And a
number of other things. We had jurisdiction over
the poverty bill. We had jurisdiction over the
food stamp problem at first. And a number of bills
like that. We had jurisdiction over so many
things. And we came through that. Those were the
things I was, those were the things I'd run for
governor of Texas three times on to improve the
education of our low standing in the union. In
public health at that time, Texas was 46 out of the
48 states. We're very low. We're still low. We're
39th, we're 49th in the union in the size of our old
age picture. And we're the richest state in the
union. We're 49th in the union in the average
payment for the dependent child i ran for governor
on those a great disappointment for me in life is
that they're still there 49th down this rich
terribly rich state i mean terribly tremendously
rich state i meant to say and we pay something like
30 some odd dollars and i think that at this time
south carolina is the only state in the western
mississippi those two generally are they've gone
up and i helped pass They put two more states in the
union while I was there. So that didn't improve
Texas standing in it. We fell from 46 to 48 and 49.
They went ahead of Texas in those things. But we
passed that legislation because that's the
committee it came to. And we got on that committee,
a bunch like myself got on it because we were for
it. I'm going to stop there. A
number of major political leaders have served as
members of this committee over the years,
including John F. Kennedy, Richard M. Nixon,
Hubert H. Humphrey, Robert F. Kennedy, and Barry
Goldwater. And then while you were chairman,
Edward M. Kennedy, Walter F. Mondale, Alan
Cranston, Jacob Javits, and Richard Schweiker.
Why do you think this committee drew such great
leaders? Because it was the committee that did
things for people. It did more things for people
than practically all the rest of the committees in
there combined. And if you wanted to serve people,
if you wanted to get something done for people, you
gravitated to that committee. When I went on the
education subcommittee, nobody wanted on it. And
it was easy. I got on that with Johnson's help. He
had a hard decision to make. Senator McNeely from
West Virginia had died with cancer, and so he was on
the committee. And labor was very strong for Joe
Clark, a strong, very liberal senator from
Pennsylvania, a Harvard graduate and the first
reformed mayor, honest mayor that Pennsylvania
had had since the Civil War, noted for corruption,
one of the most corrupt city governments. He got
elected on the campaign to clean up Philadelphia
and went on to Senate. He wanted to be on that
committee, and the Republicans had somebody
else, Goldwater or somebody. I mean, this was the
Democratic seat. I mean, Strom Thurmond was a
Democrat then. They wanted Strom Thurmond on it.
And Johnson, Queen of Rock in a hard place. As you go
inside, there's the liberals and the
conservatives. Well, I had just reached the
Senate. It's been there a few months. Nobody knew
really what I'd do. Now, this is Johnson. I didn't
go around advertising what I was going to put on
there. So Johnson brought up the question of
putting me on it. Now, I think he had some ulterior
motives, too. He thought being on the labor
committee that I would alienate the people of
Texas so it would defeat me. But that didn't worry
me. I saw a chance to get on the committee that I most
wanted on, education. And I got on it when I did a
Republican senator from Kentucky, one of my
friends I had in the Senate, and knew him in the past
years, John Sherman Cooper, a great senator. He
came to me and said, Ralph, what on earth are you
getting on that education subcommittee for?
Don't you know it'll beat you? When Happy Chandler
left the Senate to be baseball commissioner, they
put me on it. I'd just been appointed by the
governor as a vacancy. It beat me at the next
election. Then he became ambassador to India and
made a great record. They came back, they put him on
it. When Alvin Barkley died with a heart attack, he
was appointed again by the governor. He went back
on it. it beat him again and he came back a third time
then got elected to put him back on he said they put
me back on third time see it's just about four
months i said yeah and he said i'm getting off and
did that week i said well he said why are you staying
i said because i came here to try to do something
about education he said that's the lowest cause
and uh the uh I said, well, I'm going to do something
about it, or I'll get beat trying, one of the two, or
die trying. Well, it had been a lost cause. The
education bill had been killed for 20 years there
in the Congress. But the Russians had put up
Sputnik 1 in October of 57. People were terribly
afraid. They'd fallen behind in science, fallen
behind in mathematics, engineering. They didn't
quite know which people without skills out, but
they knew something was wrong for the Russians to
be ahead of us. And so there was a great push to catch
up, and we passed the National Defense
Educational Act that year with seven great
titles, and it covers everything from the primer
through the 5,500 graduate slots for people to get
PhDs. It was a great, one of the great breakthrough
legislative acts in the history of American
education, federal aid to education. One of the
biggest, one historian says it's a moral land
grant College Act founding the the land-grant
colleges of which Texas A&M was one that founded
under that act with federal land grants and they
said this is great by far the greatest act since
that 1862 that Lincoln signed and so that and being
on that committee I had was able to pass a lot of
legislation I did not put in my main time on the
elementary and secondary, that's grade and high
school. I saw by the time I went there that the
average child school child had a chance to go
through a public high school free, tuition free,
that blocked him when he wanted to go to college.
When I went on that committee, there were only
three million students in college in America, all
kinds of colleges, senior, junior, medical,
everything you had above high school, just three
million. That's where I put my work. That's where I
passed the bill. That's where I had the greatest
influence. I concentrated on that. And many
others were fighting very hard over the
elementary and secondary over two things.
religion, difference of religion, parochial
schools, or race. And I put my effort in on the
higher education. It wasn't centered there. They
were fighting those other issues down in the
trenches, lower down. And I got my higher
education bills through, and when I left there, we
had 11 million people in college in the United
States. That's the greatest contribution that I
made in the Senate, I think. Now, of course, I
couldn't do that by myself. I didn't do all that.
And I think except for my Cold War GI Bill, most of
the bills would have passed if I hadn't been there.
But there wouldn't have been as many people in
college. I was on the Appropriations Committee,
too. I got on that with six years to go. And I had six
years of my last six years as on the Appropriations
Committee, 13 years on the Education Committee. I
can say truthfully without boasting, I rolled it.
I opened the doors to colleges in America so the
youth of America could get inside. How do you think
civil rights advances would have been aided if
either Hubert Humphrey or Robert Kennedy would
have been elected president instead of Richard
Nixon in 1968? Oh, I think that they would have
advanced faster, though one thing that's
overlooked are the extraneous factors A lot of
influence on civil rights. A lot of things outside
the halls of Congress or the President's speeches
had a great influence. The civil rights bill that
passed when Johnson was in and got so much acclaim
for because he really put his shoulder to the wheel
on that civil rights bill and put his mark on it. And
while I was putting mine on education, he put his on
it, but it was being filibustered. And the general
thought in the Senate was if you've got 24
filibustering and you have 24 hour sessions a day,
they need to stand up and keep talking. You can't
break it if the 24 wouldn't work at it. Of course,
they've got to have some additional votes.
They've got to have a three-fifth can break it. So
if you've got 24 active workers, they can probably
stall the bill. And they thought that civil rights
bill was stalled. And then the Selma riots took
place. It was shown on television all over the
United States with policemen riding those
marchers trying to march from Selma to
Montgomery, Alabama to petition Governor
Wallace. They tried to ride them down, they rode
them down with horses, turned fire, turned police
dogs, and was tearing and pulling them down the
street. That so shocked the people of America. The
whole nation was so shocked by this that the
pressure had plopped like that, that the whole
idea that the filibusters were left standing
alone, and it turned all the doubters, all the
undecideds, and all those that were maybe with
them but weren't telling anybody that, it turned
them over for a patient. The second one was the open
housing bill, the real estate, the homes, open
houses, the people of all races couldn't
discriminate against it. Now, that one was really
bogged down, because the real estate lobbyists,
in fighting the civil rights bill, there was no big
money back at that time. Airlines didn't want
segregation. Trains and buses didn't want
segregation in transportation because they're
just too expensive and unwieldy to try to have a
black and white section and have a plane, et
cetera, and all those interests. But when you got
to housing, That broke the real estate interest in
the vast billions of dollars, scores of billions
of dollars involved. But it would affect the
values of the homes they were selling, the value of
real estate was involved in them. The big money was
on the side of blocking that bill. And I think it's
virtually blocked when Martin Luther King was
assassinated in Memphis. And when he was
assassinated, it turned sentiment around just
like the earlier Selma routes turned down.
turned the civil rights bill around. And while
Hubert Humphrey and Robert Kennedy would have
been strong exponents of faster advance in civil
rights, at the same time, without those
extraneous things happening, the first civil
rights bill would not have moved fast. In time, it
would have become low. In time, the opening
housing would have become low. But it would be
stalled for years. It would take years and years.
Those events catapulted them right onto
the law books. You once had a campaign slogan,
Ralph Yarborough fights the people's battles and
he wins them. Was this really an accurate count of
your victories in the Senate? And what do you see as
your main victories in the Senate? And if any, did
you have any shortcomings? Did the Senate oppose
any of your major legislation?
Yes,
the main victories I won were in the field of
education, and I think composite on higher
education. We had to pass a higher education
facility bill. Most colleges don't use college as
a generic term of university, college, junior
college, and all. Very few have the financial
resources that Texas and A&M University in Texas
have, dividing the permanent fund. Very few.
Harvard and a few great ones like that, Princeton,
Yale, Stanford, California, some do.
So without the money, even though we increased the
college enrollment about four-fold, unless they
had money to build the buildings, they couldn't
have taken care of it. So we passed the higher
education facilities bill to give money to public
colleges, both to direct money or lend it to a
church-related school, let them build by paying
interest on it, paying it back, and giving it to
independent schools like Rice and Stanford,
where they had no church connection. The
constitutional innovation against government
financing churches, we did not have gifts to
church-related schools. And it enhanced college
education greatly. I think I made a major
contribution there, I think, leaving one in the
Senate on that. Because, as I say, most of those
bills, if I hadn't been there, I think would have
passed in some form. But it depends on who's out
there working on them. I've had members of the
House tell me, I'd go over and talk to House
members. You're the only look up in amazement.
You're the only senator who ever darted my door.
Why, a senator from my home state wouldn't even
come over here at the house side to see me. I worked
on it. The police guards after we started bumming
things in Washington had to have everything
guarded. You just go in one door. We worked openly
the first few years. Staff would come back and work
till midnight, and then it wasn't safe any longer
to be attacked on the streets. And so I lived right
across the street from the Senate office
building, my apartment. And the guards told me I
was the only senator in those closing years who
came and worked in his office at night. He takes
work. They work like you see that in lawsuits. If
you don't prepare, if you don't work at it, you're
going to get beat. And I worked at those laws. I
didn't interview civilians or leave. You had to go
see people. You had to see people that hadn't
decided on it and try to get them to agree with you
individually. As soon as the House members, I
worked everywhere. What do you think was the major
legislation that you worked for that didn't pass?
The major one that I worked for that didn't pass?
The major one I worked for that didn't pass was the
space program and the satellites up there. The
government spent $25 billion on that and financed
it, and I thought they ought to remain in
government ownership and to pass the bill to... to
create a corporation to turn it over to, to give
them away to a corporation, a special
corporation, a government created. I fought
that, filibustered on that, and I filibustered or
failed. That's the only time I filibustered a bill
while I was there. who were coming along pretty
well to one of our main filibusters, jumped up and
called Mansfield a liar, and it wasn't true. He
wasn't that bad. He hadn't taken any part in it. He
was sitting there as majority leader all the time.
And just like the Jewish prayer, the thing, and
made an infuriate to all the senators, and
virtually one of the filibusters, virtually a
boat cow filibuster, always wondered why he did
it. Do you feel that your views while you're in the
Senate changed? over time? Well, the
opportunities changed. See, when I went there, I
went there wanting on the Appropriations
Committee because I lived here at Austin. I knew
where the power was and I'd served in the Army in
World War II. I'd been in West Point a year. I had
been a staff officer on the men's division for two
years and 11 months. I went in wanting on the Armed
Services Committee and had all those posts over
Texas. I was a reserve lieutenant colonel then,
and I wanted to own that. Well, Johnson was on it.
You couldn't be on the same one, the same party, the
same state. You might have your different
parties. And I wanted to own the Appropriations
Committee because they're the ones dividing the
money. That meant enough political power to do
something and put that money. If you own the
Appropriations Committee when the pie is cut, you
can get to share for your people that you vote for
all these years in campaigns. Well, Johnson was on
that, too, so that was, I was barred. And I took what
I could get in the way of the steering committee of
recommendation committees, and I took what I
could get, but fortuitously, I got on one that I
wanted very badly, labor and public welfare,
because aside from the public welfare, the food
for the starving, I wanted that, and the fair shake
for labor, I wanted, above all, education and
health. the health condition of Texas so bad. Now,
what I did for education helped the education
nation and helped health in Texas, but it didn't
push Texas up ahead of other states. It was even for
the whole nation, but it meant much more. And so
that was a thing that I never dreamed I would have,
and I went there. I thought other senators, senior
to me, it'd be years before I could get on it. I was
very much interested in parks, but the Interior
and Insular Committee Generally went to Western
Center because they had the Indian reservations,
the national parks, everything there. I had a very
good fortune there of passing more national park
legislation than anyone else, I think, in the
Senate while I was there. I wasn't on the
committee, but Senator Scoop Jackson, the
chairman of the school committee, was a good
friend of mine. His wife, he was down here during
World War II, met a young lady from Georgetown,
married her. His wife was from Georgetown, Texas.
He'd help me in every bill. The chairman of the
parks committee, subcommittee, out in Bible,
wasn't for my bills because he was Lyndon's good
friend and I was the author of the bills and they
were trying to block them. Scoop Jackson made him
bring my bills out of that subcommittee. I never
heard in my whole years in the Senate, I never heard
any other chairman of the full committee order. a
chairman of the subcommittee under him to bring
those bills out. I was a very great friend. But I
ended up as the author of the board of the Mountain
National Park, the Padre Island National
Seashore Park, and the first big picket bill ever
introduced. I wasn't able to get that passed while
I was there, except in the Senate the last few
months. It was too late to get it to the House. But I
kept working on it and served two terms as chairman
of the big big association in Texas and we finally
the whole group of us I just wanted that but the fact
that I'd been there I knew members of that
committee in the house went around Republicans on
the house committee told me they'd help me get my
bill through this land only bill was up there
lobbying on that for left and locked to stay in
lobby for money and I wasn't up there lobbying for
any corporations anything so they were pretty
sympathetic
the Civil Rights Reform in the Senate, especially
from other Southern Senators?
Well, they, I didn't have much sympathy for them
when I'd come out in the Education Bill. They were
mad. See, Johnson promoted this, well, with Dick
Russell and all. I wouldn't sign the Southern
Manifesto when I went down. And that, Johnson
promoted it. They knew he was running for
President. They'd excuse him. See, he got himself
excused. But he did, he was trying to dynamite in
other bills. He knew what I was working on in
education. He was trying to dynamite, not
necessarily against him, but he was supposed to
bypass them because I hadn't supported him,
wasn't supporting him, the president didn't. And
so he got to be president. And then I was supposed to
change the courses in midstream and lose my race.
And furthermore, once he got to be president, he'd
sign any bill I could pass. I was past them. I was
getting all my bills signed. Of course, he had
claimed credit when he signed them. This is my
great society. Turned around, one of my
educational bills gave me a big old smile and says,
Ralph, 80% of all of my great society legislation
goes through your committee. And he had all those
members of the House and Senate press turn around
and smile at me, saying, I've got your stuff and
I've got it and you haven't. But the bills are low.
The main thing was to cut the bills off. I didn't
quibble with him. I didn't get out and make
speeches and say he's trying to steal my credit. I
did not stir up a quarrel with him. I wanted the law,
the main thing, what did you pass? And the Dallas
News admitted after I was defeated, of course,
that I'd passed more national legislation than
any other senator in the history of the Senate in
Texas. I was still there when they wrote that, so
the staffers and I went over to the Library of
Congress where they have the records and got their
help. You'd call them during the Senate to dig out.
They dug out, and I hadn't passed more national.
Dallas News said national. boondoggle and get a
bridge for your district, you know, or something,
a new post office building. That's a bill, but they
weren't counting those. They counted something
that affected the whole nation, like education
and health. I've got some in this year of that in the
materials I gave you that you'll find in what I've
said, but it's substantial. The early 1970s was a
time of great scandal exposition, primarily
Watergate and the Sharpstown scandals. You've
always been an outspoken fighter of corruption.
Do you think that this corruption is as pervasive
in recent years as it was in the 60s and 70s?
Probably more so, but probably more subtle. Not as
brazen, not as open, not as brash. And a lot of
things that were corruption then are not now. The
common cause got this pact law passed so the
corporations can contribute millions. It's
illegal then for corporations to contribute to
political campaigns. They've legalized
corruption. It's not corruption anymore, but
it's legal for them to give everything they want to
by the organization of pacts to candidates. They
spend as much as a half million or a million dollars
on one candidate and one congressional race over
and over. And they left them generally when they
did that. Most of those got elected. And the
influence of the vast wealth is incomprehensibly
greater now than it was when I was there. The
special interests have a... And they've even
turned around. They call poor people and they call
the old-age pensioners and the poor people and the
hungry the special interests. And the big papers
swallow it because they're big interests too, you
know. They got that money while they sold the
Dallas Times Herald years ago when it wasn't worth
near as much as it is now for $97 million. And when
that interest rate went up under Carter and
Reagan's 20%, they didn't agree. That's what was
causing the inflation. The high interest rate was
the most inflationary thing in our economy. They
were blaming it on labor, and they were blaming it
on all kinds of things, these appropriations.
wife and I was there running when they were beating
me in 70 said I busted the budget. The total budget
was only $200 billion. It's $850 billion. It's
jumped up now $900 billion. Reagan's busting it
with this ungodly expenditures for everything
that you can shoot on Earth and now going out into
space dumping something to shoot at. He's got to
have a space war. Somebody shouldn't have let him
see that motion picture of Star Wars. Who do you
think is the examples of, you know, people who have
been elected by PAC money, especially like in
Texas? Well, Phil Graham is one. Bill Williams,
Helms in North Carolina. A number of those
senators that you, they published figures, five,
six, seven, eight million. The PAC money, Benson
spent about, lowest estimate i've ever heard of
what he's been against me is six and a half million
and i'm not talking about just out of clear blue uh
friends of mine but know something about the
expenditure of money and i've always called it six
and a half million because some people working in
his campaign down there heard that figure and quit
and joined us last week left him said i just can't
stomach this buying elections like this. A lawyer
in West Texas, a bunch of right students, head over
here when they're talking about what the budget
was for his campaign, six and a half. Since then,
I've been told it's closer to eight million, and by
people in Houston that don't admit they had
anything to do with it. But, one of the most
prominent lawyers in Texas, if I call his name,
being known all over Texas, stopped me on the
street about two years ago, Texas City, and said,
I'd known him in the law school at the University of
Texas there when I was a senior law, and he was a
junior law, and I'd known him. He was one of the big
shivers men on the other side. Stopped me and said,
Ralph, you've been claiming all the time that that
1956 governor's race was stolen from you. He said,
you may not know it, but the 1954 one was too. And
that's where he was raising a lot of the big money at
my point. in the 54th. So we know, I had a man right in
the horse's mouth that was raising the money on the
other side. And I knew they were raising that from
70. Two races in which the most money, most
millions were raised. There were millions in each
campaign, but most millions raised against me,
and I never was able to raise a million in a
campaign. I was lucky to get up towards the end. I
could get up towards the half a million before
that. One time when I was elected to the Senate, In
1957, I spent $80,000, most of it borrowed. And
when I got up there, one of the senators asked me
what I spent, and I told him. He turned around and
walked off, just saying, you're a liar. He didn't
believe it. I never told anybody in the city that
that's what I spent. Or I said I couldn't raise any
money, and he just spent a miniscule amount, and
never would tell them. They wouldn't believe it,
because they'd all spent even from small states
hundreds of thousands. What do you think should be
done to fight graft in public office, especially
in Washington and Austin?
It takes education of the people. It takes
candidates that are willing to run and put their
neck on the line and denounce it and expose it. And
it's a tough issue to get elected on unless you've
got somebody indicted or something that you would
like the public to show that people They're not apt
to believe it. Or they see a lot of graft in their
local officers and they think that's everybody in
the office is crooked. That's a, the big interest,
don't mind people believing they're buying all
this crooked because that excuses their account.
It
takes constant education. It's a different
world. In the world in which I grew up, I'm 81, I'm
14, the time I grew up, accepting money from
somebody, passing bills was a disgrace. That was a
man, the highest disgrace you could have was
taking money under the table from the public
office. It's not people that don't favor it now,
but they kind of wink at it. And they say, well, they
all do that. With this big contribution, such a
high percentage, you win, they have to take it. But
on the other hand, They don't have to take it under
the table for a bill. Now they know in advance how
they stand on these bills and raise the money and
put them in. It's legal to contribute the money
with the PACs. They know in advance how they're
going to vote, so they don't pay them money after
they get in the vote. And the number of senators
when I was there who would take money under the
table, the influence was not high at all. And the
staff knew who it was, and they talked badly clubs
of their own, the staff, the Democratic Club of
Staffers. And they gossip about the senators, the
senators that think he can do something under the
table, that thinks he can have an affair with a
woman other than his wife and not be known. It's
known around, they don't go talking to the press,
but they know it all over the Senate, nothing but
that. The staff find out, they're around, so many
of them watching everything. I don't mind
spreading a little scandal on the senator. So if
he's taking money under the table, and as I say, I
don't think a high percentage did. I think the
percentage he did was relatively small, but a lot
of them were very influential. The reason
probably the money was after, they had the
influence to pass or to stop folks. What do you
think can be done to elect public officials who
represent the interests of the common man rather
than the special interests of big business? Well,
I think organizations to help in that are growing.
The consumer groups in Texas are growing. They
were practically unknown when I was running, very
small in my last race. The Sierra Club has 12,000
members in Texas now on conservation issues, on
environmental issues. And if they were in Texas
while I was running, they were virtually unknown.
The Audubon Society is here, but they wouldn't
lobby or take part in politics because they would
lose their tax exemptions, the tax exempt
organizations that got out and contributed. So
the organizations that would support the kind of
things I was interested in, conservation,
environmental issues, protection of wildlife,
the creation of parks, was just practically
non-existent. I'm taking Texas as the best case
example now. The organizations, my goodness, if
I'd had an organization for the third of that many
members, I don't think I would have been the
future. But to be mobilized, it takes some money to
mobilize people. You've got to have money enough
to reach them to let them know how you stand. And it
still takes some money